Many plugins depend on other plugins and can build on their services if they have access to the service interfaces. So one element that we want to add to the auto coder in our research phase is searching through our existing plugins for any that might be relevant to solve our problems, then identifying the services and service interfaces and functions on those services and using those as part of our example for how to implement so that we can create a manifest of dependent services and then build our new high-level plugins on top. This should make it a lot easier to implement auto coder and new plugins since they can sit on top of other plugins and things like wallets, LP, token data messaging services, post services can be fully abstracted. They don't have to create a specific direct link. We need to make sure that this stuff is added into the auto coder context and that there are two steps: - The agent is aware while it's auto-coding that it can do this, that it can use these services and build upon them as long as it registers them as dependent types for testing. - It actually has the service registry search which is available through the plugin manager plugin to search the registry and see if there are any plugins it can depend on which will help it solve this problem.
Another thing that we might want to consider is that the agent can code an action provider or evaluator, and as long as it is fully tested and passes all the tests, Lint, TSC, everything could just be loaded right there on the spot. It can even be saved in the database or saved to some cache somewhere or whatever we want to do with it. But it doesn't have to be a full-fledged plug-in necessarily. We could also have a mode where we upgrade plugins that exist or we create action providers or evaluators and maybe a service that goes along with those.

I think that by having those just be very specific, like it can you know if it needs to create a service I think it needs to create a whole plug-in because there's probably service registry and discoverability independencies at that point. But it was just an action or a provider then it can have the ability for itself to get new capability or to do new things even building upon existing services.
