And the storm was the great God himself. So she went to the temple priests and asked what she should do. And they instructed her to sacrifice a great bull to Zeus, to satiate his hunger, perhaps to try to stave off the inevitable a little longer. What was the moment of her undoing, we might ask later? Was it the moment of the dream? Was it the moment of sacrifice? Or was it something she knew was coming all along? As if her whole life, the songs of longing, one voice among many calling, the blood and milk and honey caked upon the altar, the hair bound by day and unbound by night, her whole life was funneling her towards one moment, one unitary event. There's a feeling after the sacrifice, a post-sacrifice trance, the urgency, the beauty, the horror, the bellowing, the singing, fear and wonder and submission and pain in the eye of the great ox. There is a feeling. Semele stumbled, perhaps, from the altar. Her tunic soaked in bull's blood. She went to the temple spring to wash herself, hands trembling, still singing words of lightning and eternity. Still singing words of lightning and eternity. She went to the temple spring and, clear water running, she sang, the blood trickling down her legs as she sang. And then, nature stirred. The nostrils of the great god flared at the scent of sacrificial blood. He saw her there, hair like wheat, caked in blood and charcoal and myrrh and milk and water. Nature stirred. Something was calling her home. That night he came to her as a bull. The next night, a panther. He came as climbing ivy. He came as a rain of milk and honey and wine. He came as a serpent with a flickering tongue. He came in glimpses, flashes, brief unions that only happened under cover of night. Occasionally he lingered and they whispered to each other in the darkness. And in those conversations she heard a voice like the rumble of distant thunder and felt a breeze of breath that stirs all the green foliage in the world and glimpses of eyes that shine forever and ever. Eyes that shine forever and ever. And a sound of rivers of milk and honey. Quote. A dribble of nectar trickling down onto her lips intoxicated her. All the while vine leaves were sprouting up on the bed and there was a sound of drums beating in the darkness. The earth laughed. I think I have united with a god, she whispered to her fellow priestesses finally when she could bear the secret no longer. I think I have united with Zeus. Some chuckled to themselves. Some gazed in wonder for she did seem to shine a bit brighter. But one said, How do you know it was Zeus? How can you be sure? All you've seen are fleeting shadows in the dark, glimpses of so-called union. Are you sure? How is one sure in a world of constant chatter? How is one sure that one has tasted infinity? How is one sure? The next night he arrived. But Semele did not rush to greet him as she normally did. She asked instead for him to grant her a wish. A single, simple wish. I shall, he said, grant you anything. Anything you want, I swear upon the river Styx, the stream that transports souls into infinity. What is it you wish? And Semele said, I long to see you in your true form. Reveal yourself to me. Have you ever said this to the world? Have you ever said this to the sky of stars? Have you ever said this to the great mountain vistas? Have you ever said this to the sea? Reveal yourself to me. I long to see you as you really are. I long for a vision of the great universal mystery body that is you. All form, for all time, here, now, forever. Reveal yourself to me. Reluctantly, Zeus complied. He turned up the slightest corner of the robe of the sky of spatio-temporal realities so Semele could catch the smallest glimpse of eternity. And that's when it happened. There, at that moment, there is the moment of lightning. It's brighter than we think. It's vaster than we think. Semele, as we know Semele, was immediately incinerated to ash. Gone was Semele's body, gone, gone in an instant. Gone was Semele's body, the feet that trod the temple floors, the caked grime of burnt offerings under the fingernails, the hair like wheat, the searching eyes. Gone was Semele's body, gone to ash. Gone was Semele's body, gone to ash. Gone was Semele's body, gone to ash. Gone was Semele's body, gone to ash. Gone was Semele's body, gone to ash. And in the center of the pile of ash, born of white-hot fire, a single fruit. An infant, still premature, like a wet blue globe amidst a petrified web of scalding sand. And Zeus, his father, took him and sewed him up inside his own body, sewn into the body of the generative force of nature itself, until he was born again on a bed of ivy. Eno and Mystus found him in a purple cloak and wrapped him in their own drum skins and raised him among the rain nymphs. And he grew, riding leopards for sport, and grew and grew and grew and became the power of rapture itself, Dionysus. Trance, rapture, born of one unitary event when one self perished in a flash, and another was born. This moment is, in mythological reckoning, the holiest of moments. It lives at the center of the mystery schools because it's what souls, they say, are ultimately longing for, to feel joined, to feel home. The unitary event, destruction, regeneration, and illumination all at once, like shedding an old skin, shedding old habitual patterning and joining instead with an eternal column. Time, space, fury, buzzing, humming, shining, ablaze, the unitary event of lightning. And what's important here, as you've heard me say many times on this podcast, is that this lightning is not a metaphor. It's felt somatic experience, the flashing, buzzing, luminous, encompassing blaze of high, high trance. The controlled seizure, the pituitary event, as Joseph Sansonese calls it, lightning and trance share a deep relationship that spans thousands of years and dozens of cultures across the world. You find this relationship deeply articulated in the Kalahari at the heart of the oldest continuous culture on the planet. You find it in the Sufi traditions. You find it in the trance cults that spanned ancient Greece and Central Asia. You find it in Tibet. And, of course, you find it in full expression in India. In India, the traditions of Kundalini revolve around this experience of interiorized lightning. So the traditions that truly know trance, that truly know rapture, that truly understand the physiology of divine experience, spend a lot of time speaking about lightning, invoking lightning, and ultimately seeking to transform the individual into a vessel that can handle a steady flow of lightning. And the mythic figures that are the gatekeepers to this flow of energy are the most revered, holiest, often most secret figures in global tradition. Semele's longing to see reality unclothed is the longing for the individual to know the heart of reality, and to be utterly subsumed into the body of the cosmos.\n Semele's longing is the holiest, most sacred thing that ever could be. Semele Kundalini and the Path of Interiorized Lightning, this time on The Emerald. If you've ever been near enough to lightning to have witnessed its power, then you know full well the power of lightning. The change in the air, the buzz and the crack, the hiss, the power. There are over three million flashes of lightning hitting the planet every day. A hundred more in the three seconds since I started this sentence. And now, a hundred more. For me, I have a healthy respect for lightning that sometimes borders on fear, especially when I'm above timberline. It comes from a camping trip when I was about 22 that involved three consecutive days of dodging lightning. It's no wonder lightning is synonymous with power in the pantheons of so many cultures. It was probably, before modern explosives, the single most powerful and dramatic event human beings would witness on a regular basis. So you have lightning gods on six of the seven continents, from Sumeria to Mesoamerica to the Amazon to Cambodia. You have mighty gods like Thor and Yayayas, and of course Zeus, wielding lightning as a formidable weapon. But it's not as simple in the myths as lightning equating to brute force. And this is where stories like Semele's tend to get lost, because it gets filed away as another story of all-powerful gods zapping someone with lightning as a kind of punishment. And that's not the heart of the story of Semele. To give Semele her due, we have to first do a little bit of cultural unpacking around the force of nature known as Zeus. So these days, when we hear about Zeus, we think maybe angry sky god, moody adulterer, always cheating on Hera with some nymph or other, patriarchal perhaps, primitive, ooh, look, he's got thunderbolts as weapons, how very macho. And those thunderbolts are used as what? Punishment, right? So so-and-so did this, and then Zeus fried him with lightning. Zeus's lightning becomes something to instill fear in the young ones, step out of line, and Zeus will fry you too. But Zeus, for the practitioner of the mysteries, is much, much more than this. Zeus is the generative power of nature itself, the oneness, the brilliance, the luminosity, the power, the power that moves as if we could ask this universe to show us what it really is underneath. If we could see into the atomic forces driving all things, we'd see what in India is called the Kalagni, the fire of time, an infinite column of lightning, an axis of blaze. If we could dissolve, if our small selves could dissolve into the absolute, into one unitary event, this would be joining with Zeus, whose name means light and also means life, uniting with the force of life, luminosity, the generative power of nature, what we've all been seeking all along. And so Zeus, too, was felt. His isn't just the case of an angry god hanging out in the sky, detached from humanity, zapping people with lightning. Zeus was sung to and loved and adored and cherished in awe and wonder, and music and drums were played for him, and there was dancing in praise of the shining axis of all that is. Orpheus sings of, quote, Zeus' omnipotence, his supreme transcendence of the cosmic order. Zeus was the first, Zeus last, Zeus of the bright lightning's bolt, Zeus at the head, Zeus at the middle, from Zeus all things are made, Zeus the king, the beginning, the ruler of all, of the bright lightning's bolt. And so the devotees of Zeus gathered on the very summit of Mount Lycaon where there was a temple to Zeus right at his birthplace. Great ceremonies were held and athletic games and song and dance and ritualized shapeshifting. It was a holy, holy place, this high summit amidst the striking lightning. And there was one particular spot, one place, so holy, no one was even allowed to step inside. For if they did, they would die in a unitary blaze. No shadows were cast in that spot, it was said. It was eternal, inalterable light, the birthplace of light itself. As Laszlo Fodenyi recounts in his beautiful chapter on Zeus and Semele, quote, Pausanias tells us that in the Arcadian Lycaon there was a holy site of Zeus that was out of bounds for all, the Lycaos. If entering this site, despite the warning, human or animal would not be able to cast a shadow because light originates there. In Lycaos, home of thundering Zeus, the all-destroying light of lightning is incessant and must have been akin to the seed of Heraclitus' everlasting fire, the hearth of the universe, the house of Zeus, the mother of God, and the altar, the encounter and measure of nature. Whoever settles at this hearth can rightly sense that they have arrived at the source of existence. In order for this to happen, one has to say farewell to the world of shadows. Far from the world and close to the fire, this is the moment of divine experience. End quote. The birthplace of light, the archaeological record shows worship dating back 5,000 years, an ash altar with offerings, pottery, jewelry, drinking vessels, goat bones, and there in the sand, something else, fulgurite. Have you seen it, fulgurite? It's what happens when lightning strikes particular types of sand or soil, and the shape of the lightning is petrified. One moment of electric luminosity frozen in time, eternity that casts no shadow. It looks like a freeze frame of the consciousness that has found eternity, a neural web of dynamic activity. It looks like the unitary trance event itself, the branching neurons suffused with light and frozen in time. Its presence in the shrine of Zeus on Mount Lycaon means, of course, that this was a place where lightning struck the earth a lot. It also means that devotees offered lightning back to lightning, source back to source. Lightning was sacred, its residue was sacred, the ground it touched was sacred. From the cult of Pan, quote, in general, the ancients treated places struck by lightning as particularly sacred. They often thought of them as natural sanctuaries of Zeus Kataibates, the one who descends, and they named these places Enelusia, places of his coming. So across Greece we find a web of lightning strikes that become points of sacredness. Some of the sacred mystery sites were sacred specifically because lightning had struck there. And why are places of lightning strike sacred? Because lightning is an emphatic exclamation point, a summary of the power of nature itself. It destroys even as it generates, just as nature does. It is luminous, awesome, beyond our immediate control, just as nature is. Like the serpent, it has a zigzag shape that is dynamism itself, movement. And yet the lightning strike is also a frozen moment. It is eternity and temporality all at once. Quote, the power of lightning is really mysterious. It originates in nothingness and turns into nothing. And while it lasts, it outrivals everything. Everything is subordinated to it, and by comparison, everything becomes void. A glimpse of lightning is a glimpse of eternity. And lightning is also life-giving, generative, fertile. It arrives with a downpour of rain that creates life. And therefore, lightning is a seed sower. From the Rig Veda, quote, the winds blow forth, the lightning bolts fly, the plants shoot up, the sun swells, refreshment arises for all creation when Parjanya aids the earth with his seed. So the god of lightning fertilizes even as he destroys, quote, you who by eternal law has spread out flowering and seed-bearing plants and streams of water, you who has given form to the incomparable bolts of lightning in the sky.\n vast and encompassing the vast universe you are a fit subject for our song so the old old Vedic texts sing to lightning Ajah Ekapada the unborn one-footed God the divine as a shining unitary event encapsulating all dualities and coming in the form of a single strike of lightning life giver and destroyer and resurrector of new life so there is a deep relationship between lightning and life lightning and birth Mary in the Bible was impregnated by holy fire by generative lightning and Fuldeny says of Semele quote lightning struck the earthly princess to death while her son was born in the white heart of the fire and so deadly fire turned out to be life-giving the turtle dancers of San Juan Pueblo sing to the generative power of lightning quote daybreak is coming from the horizon the dawn boys are singing together in unison the songs they sing sound beautiful daylight is coming over the horizon the dawn girls are calling like trumpets it rings out and it sounds beautiful way out in the north the okua create lightning the lightning flashes followed by rain so that the corn can grow way out in the south the oilua create lightning the lightning flashes followed by rain so that children can be born so places where lightning become holy places to honor the force of life itself who is at its core lightning and the devotees honor this force of life by themselves feeling the energy of lightning in states of rapture initiates describe this interior lightning from Yulia Ustinova quote in the tablets from theory the initiates state that they have been struck by lightning and freed from the circle I have flown out of the heavy difficult circle say the tablets so here initiates into the mysteries of the one who is living lightning are themselves struck by interior lightning the electric nature of it is the felt experience of rapture that rapture is sacred it is redemptive to be struck by this interiorized lightning is to be released quote the lightning Zeus consecrates as it kills when it strikes a man he does not really die or at least his death looks different from others once struck by lightning a man is carried off by Zeus to another existence this death that looks different from others is the death that comes with initiation it is meant to be as close to actual death as possible it is meant to transport the initiate into a state of absorption a defining moment a unitary flash until they themselves perhaps become like hollow tubes of fulgurite vessels for lightning offerings for lightning itself it is no stretch to imagine initiates on the mountaintops pounding drums and blowing pipes in the middle of lightning storms after days of fasting having drunk the entheogenic ergot wind howling lashing calling out to Zeus calling to the light of life to the light of life calling to the light of life calling calling to the light of life quote what kind of experience was it did it include sensations of being struck and purified with lightning feeling that one's mortal foundations were burnt is the strongest possible way to describe the annihilation of the one who lived before the initiation even as a metaphor and this is Eustenova here but I suggest that at least some must I that's initiates into the mysteries use the image of incineration of their past not only as a symbol but as a faithful description of their initiatory sensations of being struck by lightning or seeing the great light which are characteristic of mystic or revelatory experience end quote so being struck by lightning is apotheosis it is how one merges with the divine and it is felt it is felt experience it is the sizzle the flash the white hot burn the glare the trance practitioners describe around the world hissing cracking buzzing blazing lightning the lightning of rapture lightning is the trance event quote franz von bader calls this the silver flash which allows for simultaneous vision with both the inner and outer eye lovers discover each other with such a silver flash when setting eyes on each other for the first time the gaze is most burning in the moment of love and in German the terms for lightning for a glance and for moment stem from the same root this flash is the flash of recognizing a lover of recognizing the outer world and inner world at once of creation and destruction and crisis that visits the artist just as the meditator just as the lover just as the seeker as Paul Kahlili writes quote Soloviev intuited that the moment of aesthetic creation would vanish or dissolve once we attempted to rationalize it this moment is like a flash of lightning that stops for no one the spontaneous aesthetic moment is as close as humans get to angelic cognition so simile a story is not the story of someone who asked for something she couldn't handle it is the story of the seeker who wants to know the cosmos and comes to know it through the power of lightning the seeker who craves the moment of her incineration which is the moment of her ecstasy which is the moment of her vision quote catching a glimpse of Zeus and being struck by lightning simile must have appeared like a landscape shrouded in the light of lightning adoring frantic overpowered and enthralling at the same time simile who herself became fulgurite whose name means earth and who then became a hollow tube a vessel for divine lightning simile story is the story of the seeker who witnesses the cosmos in its raw naked intensity in its billion-year power in its bend and its sway and its vibrancy and then she passes on the mystery right to all of us she passes it on through her son who brings the Bacchic rites that allow for all of us to feel the state of ecstatic trance which is the state of interiorized lightning it's difficult to overstate the scale and impact over time of the trance cults of Dionysus I'm always trying to give a sense of scale and scope on this podcast because when we think of rapturous traditions we might easily file thousands upon thousands of years of human experience away as an incidental footnote and that can do a big disservice to our understanding of history and our understanding of what it means to be human rapture as you've heard me say is not incidental to human beings it is central central to life the Dionysian rites provided thousands upon thousands probably millions of people over thousands of years across Europe and Asia access to the state of rapture the state of interiorized lightning the state of thunder and nectar and coiling powers it is possible that 2,500 years ago a traveler from Athens could embark on a decade-long journey across what is now Macedonia Bulgaria the Balkan states Turkey Syria Jordan Iran Iraq Afghanistan Turkmenistan Kazakhstan Uzbekistan Pakistan finally India and encounter Dionysian ecstatic practices and practitioners everywhere they went here the cry and the sound of the drum echoing across the great landscapes of Central Asia there are images of Dionysus graven in stone and Karnataka in the jungle temples of southern India across northern Pakistan across the Oxus and where the ivy of Dionysus grows there is trance similes gift the moment of adoring frenzy across the world like climbing ivy like sheet lightning ephemeral milky white Dionysus brought interiorized lightning Bromias another name for Dionysus means the roarer the thunderous and it was said that lightning and thunder struck at the apex of the Dionysian rituals and that the ground itself would flow with milk and the ceremonial staff would drip with honey the Mayonads of Dionysus were said to carry fire on their heads without being harmed which may be something they actually did in ritual ecstasy and may also be a recognition of the lightning that they interiorized through rapturous practice because trance states are\n There are states of interiorized lightning, and this is true all across the world. Have you heard the stories of the lightning epiphany? Have you heard? Have you heard the stories? Have you heard the stories of the lightning epiphany? Many are the stories of the lightning epiphany, the lightning of ecstasy, the lightning that strikes the seeker practitioner in the midst of rapture, the heavenly glows, the flashes of lightning and torches appearing miraculously in the sky. These are regular features of divine epiphanies, says Sotorola Konstananda Nidhu. Pandemeter reveals her true nature, changing her appearance from an old woman to that of a divinity. Light shone from her skin, and the house filled with a brilliance like lightning. The first time she steps into the palace of Kilios, she filled the doorway with divine light. Glorious is your revealer and illuminator, who pours down the lights that confer on you the state of eternity, declares the Dasatir. Zia Nayat Khan tells us in his book Mingled Waters, for it is the eternal that confers lightning upon the practitioner, quote, sometimes the flashes are soothing, other times they strike with a jolt. Various colors appear, each linked to a particular organ of subtle perception. At times an outer event sparks an inner state. I saw numerous fires of every possible hue, fires visible to no one except those like statues, says Azar Kaivan, the Zoroastrian illuminationist. So if we were to make a map of rapture that spanned the world across time and space, delineating the cultures that practiced trance and depicting common threads of experience, it would look like a web of three-dimensional lightning surrounding and pervading the world, striking all across India, Central Asia, Tibet, Mongolia, Siberia, Lapland, Sub-Saharan Africa, North America, Mesoamerica. Is it a coincidence that the cultures most familiar with, most steeped in trance practice, have a common language of lightning? Is it a coincidence to find a common language of zigzags, humming and buzzing, bolts of lightning, roaring thunder, nectars, honey, serpents and spines from ancient Egypt to the Klamath Valley to the Kalahari? No, it's not a coincidence. It is the felt language of rapture. The Sufi mystics tell us that eventually the state of interiorized lightning, which may start in bolts and flashes, persists, lingers, as the practitioner learns to become a vessel for lightning. And this has been the great work of the trance cultures of the world, to learn how to be a vessel for lightning, to harness interiorized lightning, to ride the lightning, as one heavy metal band once said. It's a very simple shape, the zigzag, the wavy line. It is simple and it is everywhere. It's on 30,000-year-old rock murals. You'll find it on Neolithic pottery and in Egyptian hieroglyphs, where it signified the movement of water, and the vital current of nature, and the serpent, and it signified the sound, the hum and buzz of dynamism, which eventually became the letter M with its zigzag lines. You can see it flipped on its side in the letter Z, which hums with a similar electricity and is the heart of the sound that the Kalahari trance practitioners say they hear when they enter the trance state. The wavy lines on my wife's belly after giving birth to two children are imprints of the contractive and expansive power of creation. I saw, in Brazil once, on a young Samauma tree, one of the tallest trees in the forest, a whole series of ripples of electric green wavy lines, stretch marks, as the vital force of the tree expanded towards the heavens. Wavy lines are vibratory power, are expansive and contractive power. If you look at Native American petroglyphs from the southwest of the Klamath Basin, you'll find lots of zigzags, lots of wavy lines. You'll find these wavy lines standing alone, as rivers perhaps, or unseen energies, or snakes, or lightning. And you'll also find these wavy lines depicted inside bodies, bodies permeated with wavy lines, currents that exist within and without bodies. There's a congruity here that's worth understanding between the serpentine shape of water and that of lightning, between snakes, water, lightning, and humming sounds, and spines. The lightning strike is a zigzag column, an undulant spine. The snake is an undulant spine, and the spine is an undulant snake, a milky white serpent in the golden tree of the nervous system, bristling like lightning, like a wild dog's tail, as the Egyptians described it. The spine is both serpentine and electric, and all the zigzag dynamism of the cosmos is felt and registered in the spine. The sight of a serpent might cause a jolt in the spine. The sight and sound of lightning might do the same. The lightning might bring showers of rain. The jolt of electricity in the spine might be followed by a flood of cascading hormones that feel like showers of rain. There is a somatic congruity between serpentine shapes, lightning, flowing water, and spines, all of which play central roles in trance practices that sought to harness the power of the dynamism of the cosmos, this cosmos built of wavy lines, practices designed to interiorize lightning. In Spirit Fire and Lightning Songs, author Robert J. David speaks of how zigzag lines were used by shamanic practitioners to gain access to states of rapturous consciousness. Quote, zigzag lines may come to represent snakes, lightning, or waves. In this regard, carving residual markings on the rock face assisted shamans in achieving a directed state of trance. Carving them in the shape of zigzags gave their supplications a sense of focus that was perfectly compatible with their beliefs that yajayas through the use of lightning would make their spirit familiars visible and accessible. Probably because of the zigzags' resemblance to lightning, it became synonymous with a person's ability to see into the spirit world. In the Klamath Basin, the spirit lightning personified this very concept. The primary role of this spirit lightning was to provide the kind of illumination that allowed shamans to see spirits. David Lewis Williams echoes this notion that the wavy lines depicted in rock art facilitated the somatic experience of energy in trance. Quote, we may say that many paintings were less like a zigzag symbolizing electricity on a fuse box than an electric wall plug to which appliances could be connected. So we gaze across the world of trance traditions and we see a common language of serpentine shapes and spines and flowing waters and lightning. Four thousand years ago, someone carved this into the sandstone of the Pyramid of Unas in Egypt. Quote, it is created for him from the fire of his own serpentine light body. Its essence is an eye thrust out. With it, the holy aspects are revealed. You it burns. Rise rise, the serpentine light body burns in your skull. The rising of the serpentine light body directly parallels the Indian descriptions of kundalini, the coiled lightning energy harnessed through very specific yogic practices. The Padmasamhita says the kundalini bursts forth like a blazing snake. And the Garaksha Shataka proclaims that the kundalini flashes like a streak of lightning in the mouth of the central channel of the body. And the Siddha Siddhanta Padati urges the practitioner to visualize the kundalini as ten million suns rising out of a coiled serpent. And from the Vijnana Bhairava Tantra, quote, imagine the Shakti, that's the vibratory power, imagine the Shakti rising like a streak of lightning from one center to the next in succession. When she reaches the uppermost center, three fists above the crown, there comes the great dawn of liberation. These days, often misunderstood, appropriated, watered down, fabricated altogether, at their radiant core, the teachings of kundalini are designed to harness living lightning. Until one reaches the place, as the Yoga Vasistha says, where the mind of the one in meditative self-actualization is as a thunderbolt. The adept's concentration is a hundred million lightning bolts, says\n And it's not just making up a metaphor. Notice there's not the word like in there. Tchaikovsky's translation added the word like. Like a hundred million lightning bolts. And I actually disagree with that addition. The Adepts concentration is a hundred million lightning bolts. It is the point of universal fusion. The inner and the outer eye as Fuldeny described. It is eternity. It is Zeus revealed to Semele in the unitary moment. The Adepts concentration is the place of the bonfire of the self. The nest of eternal lightning. You may have heard of Tibetan Tantric Buddhism referred to as Vajrayana. Vajrayana, the thunderbolt path. And Vajra is a very interesting word because it denotes the brilliance and luminosity and flow of lightning. And also the container that is adamantine that can hold the lightning. Irresistible force of lightning and the impenetrability of diamond meet in the word Vajra. The Vajra path, the Vajra body. And so sometimes you hear people saying well it's called the lightning path because it's a metaphor. It's a metaphor for how fast the path is. It's a quick way to enlightenment. It's the lightning path. Or it's called the lightning path because it's powerful. It's a metaphor. And as you know I'm very fond of saying on this podcast it's not a metaphor. It's a description. The lightning path is the path of interiorized lightning. It's the path in which the practitioner somatically experiences all types of lightning luminosities. Flashing luminosities, pervading luminosities, sparkling luminosities, cascading luminosities. It's the path in which one feels lightning within. The Vajra bearers described in the Thangka art come with their diamond lightning. The brilliant blaze of consciousness realization. Offering practitioners the same experience of lightning within their own consciousness. So in many tantric practices the practitioner feels storms of Vajras entering the crown of the head. These aren't little metal ceremonial tourist Vajras that they're asking us to visualize. This is a storm of flashing diamond lightning. The Shaktipat, the transference of energy from teacher to student is like lightning inundating the scalp and the skull. So the lightning path is the path of experiential lightning. Building a Vajra body. A vessel that can hold a perpetual flow of lightning. Kundalini Kundalini in the traditional vision is not simply an electrical current that runs up the spine or a tingly feeling, a momentary spasm, a peppiness after practice, or something to enhance your sex life. The Kundalini power is not a tool. Kundalini traditionally is a goddess. Like Semele she is a goddess. The goddess. The mother goddess. Have you heard? Have you heard of Kundalini? The mother goddess? Have you heard? Have you heard of Kundalini the mother goddess? Semele and Kundalini, who both bring the lightning event, whose iconography and ritual practice include all the hallmarks of trance cultures, spines that exude nectar, coiling serpents, trees of branching light, the sounds of humming and buzzing, the roar of thunder, the rise of lightning, who are both accessed through trance and ritual music and drumming, and right at the heart of it, who both share a story of an incinerated goddess. Like Semele, goddess Kundalini has a story of being burnt to ash, too. The goddess immolates in an act of single-pointed longing from the Kumarika Kandaha, quote, Having stoked the supreme fire, brilliant with waves of raging flames, having contemplated it burning fiercely in the center of the mandala, the goddess sat upon the adamantine seat and recalled in her mind the power and energy of the fearsome goddesses. She burnt herself within the fire of time and became a smokeless burning coal. This wise woman, reduced to ashes, left the mortal world. And from the ashes, quote, the goddess, filled with hundreds of nets of lightning flashes and beautifully illuminated by the lights of effulgent power, assumed the form of the divine generative point. So, like Semele, her death is a moment of birthing. From this single generative point, she bends, she bends, she bends, she bends, bends, she bends, shying away from her lover who is enthralled by her power. And in her bending, she gives birth to the universe, bending from oneness into multiplicity, the whole of creation generated from her bending, quote, She is consciousness, the blessed goddess, the bender and the expander. Constantly active, the energy of her divine goad runs, rolls, blocks, contracts, and expands. Dynamism. The goddess, quote, causes trembling through rhythm. She is the reflective power of consciousness who gives rise to creation, awakens the kundalini shakti, produces states of transpossession, and invigorates the sociocultural mandala through ritual and cultural performances of music and dance. She is kubjika, the coiled serpentine power that, when harnessed, travels to the apex of the subtle physiology, end quote. The bender and the expander, remember those wavy lines, those zigzags that are the dynamism of creation that lives within and without the body? They are her. With lightning intensity, serpentine undulation, thunderous roaring, she emits, devours, exudes, absorbs, expands, contracts, gives birth, dies, regenerates, individually, universally, everywhere, forever. As Andre Perdue translates, the great goddess, eternally present in the hearts of yogis, is also present eternally in the entire universe. Where she lies coiled up inside the root of all living creatures, dazzling like a flash of lightning, folded in upon herself this goddess' kundalini, the coiled one, serpentine, holding within herself all the gods, all the mantras, all the phases of creation, all pervading finer than fine, she generates the triadic energy of the moon, sun, and fire. Made of sound, she is the creative energy imminent to the entire universe. And what motivates this sacred dance, this play, this power, this bending and expanding? As with semile, what motivates it is love, longing for union. The goddess sports forever around her eternal lover, say the texts. She longs for love, then bends away, She longs for love, then bends away in shyness. She withdraws, then bursts forth with new lightning majesty. So the stories of semile and kundalini are love stories. They are stories built upon waves and sways and bends and hums and hisses and roars and howls, infinite waves of love and longing that electrify the cosmos into being. They are love stories built on vibration, and vibration in its bending and swaying and humming and hissing and roaring and howling is love itself. This love and longing and devotion can be felt. If we can shake the scholars awake a little bit, if we can shake the modern-day yoga teachers awake a little bit, love can be felt in the hymns to her, in the descriptions of her, in the love and awe and fear and holy reverence that saturates each of the verses sung to her. And, you know, it's not our fault. We're often so stunted these days when it comes to devotional love, but the love story at the heart of it is the very part that really should not be lost, and the devotion that is born of that love is the key to the whole thing. What do I mean by that? I mean, what drove the initiate to undertake the experience that was so close to death that caused them to feel the strike of death?\n What drove the drums on the summit of Mount Lycaon that called Zeus, the eternal column of light and life, to strike his initiates awake? Devotion. Devotional love. The Kumari Kakandaha says something very simple. It says, the teachings and practices should never be taught to those without devotion. Very simple, right? And it's a recurring theme. The Christian text, The Cloud of Unknowing, from the 14th century says the exact same thing. So the practitioner of the lightning path feels, first and foremost, a holy, reverent, loving devotion for this redemptive power of lightning. What else would we feel for the very thing that might utterly transform us while it simultaneously reveals to us the secret heart of nature? So devotees sing to the goddess who is deep blue-black like thunderclouds with a radiant core like blazing lightning. They sing to the goddess that blazes, that makes of the devotee's heart a bonfire, as Ram Prasad said, and burns it to ashes, singing in praise of the great cosmos and of the interior anatomy of the devotee simultaneously in the way that only the kundalini traditions can. Quote, the void in the center of the palate struck with the lightning flash of kundalini's power lies supine. I praise the supreme goddess who resides in this void mounted on the chariot of the humming sound of the absolute, and I praise the unstruck sound who arrives as a blue lightning flash, burning fiercely and very bright, and I bow to the goddess who resides in the body of Bhairava's dancing form and plays within it like a lightning flash in a sky of dense storm clouds. And, her luster is as that of a flash of young, strong lightning. Her sweet murmur is like the hum of swarms of love-mad bees. She produces melodious poetry in all languages. It is she who maintains all the beings of the world by means of the inhale and the exhale, and shines in the root center like a chain of brilliant lights. So the love her devotees have for her is the love of existence itself, for she is this bristling world, this swaying world, this vibration, this lightning flash, so momentary, so eternal, which illuminates our separateness from source and our inseparability from it at the exact same time. Quote, the supreme kundalini is the flow of unstruck sound that resounds eternally everywhere. This is the river that flows constantly through the sky of the supreme principle. Something so holy, so profound, we can see why the Kumarakonda says that the teachings and practices should never be given to just anybody, not even to one's own child if they are devoid of devotion. And these days, kundalini is a buzzword, no pun intended. It is a product. It is a lifestyle accessory. It's, hey, let me grab a $20 green juice and head to my kundalini class. Much of what is thought of as kundalini, Yogi Bhajan's kundalini yoga that became the template for many of the modern kundalini classes, is actually a modern fabrication that bears little if any resemblance to the 1300-year-old tradition of the one who bends and sways and arrives in flashes of lightning. And these days, she's everywhere. She's invoked at festivals and workshops. She's name-dropped in casual conversation. Neo-tantrikas have now reclaimed her somewhat from the Bhajan crowd, and now trauma-informed experts have gotten involved, as they seem to do these days, and people are looking out for signs of someone having a kundalini awakening, and lists are put forward of symptoms to look for, and instructions are given, and Facebook users chat casually about their kundalini experiences and offer each other tips of the trade, and all of this might be inevitable, and it might be part of the bending and swaying process of the goddess herself, and I'm sure many people have found their modern-day kundalini practice very helpful, and I'm certainly not here to say it has to be one way or the other way. I'm not an initiate into the kubjika sect. I'm not a gatekeeper of her glorious tradition. What I can say is based simply on a feeling, a personal feeling. I look out sometimes at how she is bandied about, and casually name-dropped, and put forward as a badge of personal attainment, as some kind of accomplishment, or individual differentiator. I look at how she is treated as a prize on the one hand, and treated as a servant on the other, treated as a trophy wife perhaps, pimped out to lure in workshop customers, and I feel sad. I feel sad for kundalini, because, well, how do I even say this? How many know that to speak of her is to speak of the holiest thing that is? There are shrines to her that I have had trouble even looking at directly. There are names of hers that it's probably better not to even utter. There are images of her to which the only possible alignment is with the head bowed. She's not a little jolt to feel, a little thrill in the spine, a peppy feeling after class. She's not something that's here to validate us, or to reinforce our identity as a practitioner. She is the unitary moment itself, the keeper of the lightning flash that illuminates everything. Who we are, what we're doing, why we're here, where we're going, how to get there. She is mystic experience. And how I wandered wastelands lost without her, wandered lifetimes lost without her, scrambling and scratching for a glimpse without her, her the bender and the expander, the stirrer of space-time, the beloved and the lover, the lit fuse in all creation, to find in this world of constant distraction and confusion, to find a single glimpse. This is the holiest thing there is. And so I know holy might not be a word that some of the listeners of this podcast use. It's a way of saying that when I look out across the yoga world these days, quite often I see what feels to me like a tragic opera, complete with cases of mistaken identity and potential lovers passing by each other too distracted to notice, and protagonists not realizing what was in front of them all along, and self-proclaimed experts always cashing in. I find myself, like many, sifting through so much ancillary glamour, and so much emphasis on individual opinion, and everyone's like a ten-watt bulb trying to outshine the other ten-watt bulbs. And where is she in all of it? Where is she with her ten billion volts of shine? Gone in a flash, that same force that brings universes into being with the slightest sway also flits quickly away when there is no space for her. The old gods aren't impressed with statistics, says Martin Shaw, and I don't think they're impressed with much of the vernacular and dialogue these days coming from any side. What brings her, what calls her forth, the texts say, is genuine reverence and devotion. Genuine reverence and devotion. Through step-by-step initiation, through slow, slow, slow, slow, slow practice over time, and through deep, loving adoration. If nothing else, if none of these other things, then at least deep, loving adoration. Kundalini, the serpentine fire of creation that carries with her the power to transform lives, to waken hearts, to offer a vessel for tears of longing, the only possible alignment to her, for those who understand her, is complete.\n Adoration. The only way to truly speak of her is with a melting heart. The way one would bow before the altar of creation itself, because that altar is hers. The void that it sits upon, the webs of lightning and nets of emeralds that surround it, the generative womb point at the center and the world yantra it generates, the singularity it ultimately dissolves back into, all of it is hers. Her. The tiny ripple that sounds of itself by itself forever, that reflects across the great expanse of space and starry bodies, and reflects equally in the fine vibration of hearts that know love. Kundalini. If anything is holy, that is holy. Among holy things, that is the holiest. Have you heard? Have you heard the story of Semele, who walked the path of lightning? Have you heard the story? Have you heard the story of Semele, and did you know that she rose again? Beloved, did you know that she rose again? There is a lake near Lerna, the Alcyonian Lake, unfathomably deep, site of nocturnal rites and ritual gatherings and annual celebrations of the cult of Semele. We can only go there in our minds, we have to imagine what it would have been like. What would it have been like? Lamps floating in the water, light illuminating the midnight water, garlands of bright flowers in the water, devotees weeping by the shore, weeping, weeping by the shore. Semele, Semele, they wept by the shore. And the droning buzz of the aulos, the flutes of the mother goddess ringing. Her story is sung aloud, sung aloud, the story of Semele, who wanted lightning in eternity, who burned in an instant and delivered in her burning the lord of trance himself. Semele, Semele, and the drums sound faster now, and the pipes play, and the footsteps pound upon the earth. And something moves within the water, something moves within the water, a figure rises from the water, an ivy-clad god emerges from the water, holding his mother's resurrected body. For it was here at the Alcyonean lake, unfathomably deep, that Dionysus dove into the underworld, into Hades, to retrieve Semele. Her son went there to retrieve her, and he did. He retrieved her and carried her up. He carried her up and upon her emergence he named her Thione. Thione, Thione, the devotees call Thione. Thione, which means the frenzy, the rush of adoration, the point of ecstatic trance. Semele Thione emerges from the water. Illuminated, bright, golden, silver, she emerges from the water. Semele Thione emerges from the water and rules the point of ecstasy forever. Now she is reborn. Semele Thione emerges from the water and rules the point of ecstasy forever. Have you heard? Have you heard that Semele Thione rules the point of ecstasy? Rules the realm of interiorized lightning forever. Rules the realm of interiorized lightning forever. First of all, a very special thanks to Serena Joy Bixby for providing the beautiful vocals for this episode, the vocals that really bring the sung mythologies to life. Serena joined us for the Water series and hopefully she'll be joining us for future episodes as well. Thanks, Serena. So, as always, this episode contains reference to many books, articles, etc. These include the Companion to Greek Mythology by Ken Dowden and Neil Livingston, the Yoga Vasistha by Swami Venkatesananda, the Rig Veda, Mingled Waters by my old friend Zia Anayat Khan, the Cult of Pan in Ancient Greece by Philippe Bourgeot, Alteration of Consciousness in Ancient Greece by Yulia Ustinova, the Angel's Corpse by Paul Kalili, the 1992 Turtle Dance of San Juan Pueblo Lessons with the Composer, Peter Garcia by Hao Huang, Ride the Lightning by Metallica, The Glance of the Medusa by Laszlo Fuldeny, Dawning Moon of the Mind by Susan Brind Morrow, the Vinana by Rava Tantra, Harish Wallace's translation, Vatch, the Concept of the Word in Select Hindu Tantras by Andre Padu, the Serpent Power by Arthur Avalon, the Goddess Within and Beyond the Three Cities by Jeffrey Liedtke, the Light Imagery of Divine Manifestation in Homer by Sotorula Konstantinidou, Spirit, Fire, and Lightning Songs, Looking at Myth and Shamanism on a Klamath Basin Petroglyph Site by Robert J. David, A Cosmos in Stone by David Lewis Williams, and, of course, the Kumari Kakandaha, the Section of the Mantana by Rava Tantram Concerning the Virgin Goddess Translated in Commentary by Mark Duskowski. A note on the Kundalini texts that I quote from in this episode, the texts that I quote from, these texts are widely available and I wanted to give a feeling of the reverence and power of these texts and the practices that are outlined in the texts are intended to be for initiates because they're very powerful practices. I think it's important for us in this day and age to understand the traditions of ecstasy, the traditions of rapture, and the language with which they speak, and also I think it's important to hold practices that were traditionally taught within initiatory settings to hold them with respect and regard and not do anything foolish. We've been having these twice monthly study groups that are available for all podcast patrons and they usually run about two hours each and there's time for question and answer and we go over some of the myths that are talked about in the episodes and they're really a nice way to get to know the myths a little bit deeper and to go into some deeper discussion about the topics on the podcast and it's really easy. All you have to do is sign up to become a patron, which only costs about six bucks a month, and you sign up to become a patron on patreon.com slash the emerald podcast, patreon.com slash the emerald podcast. Once you sign up you get an email that tells you when the next study group is going to be. There's a couple of other podcasts that you can sign up for, but you can't sign up for the emerald podcast. Hi everyone, I'm Josh and this is The Emerald. Currents and trends through a mythic lens. The podcast where we explore an ever-changing world and our lives in it through the lens of myth, story, and imagination. The Emerald. All that's happening on this green jewel in space. Hi friends, a quick reminder here at the start that this podcast depends completely on patron support. So the reason I'm able to do this podcast full-time is because I'm a big fan of patrons. So if you're a podcast listener and you feel like you've been getting something of value from the podcast and you want to support the artistic vision of The Emerald, please consider becoming a patron. It costs as little as six dollars per month and you can find out more at patreon.com slash the emerald podcast. Becoming a patron is also the best way to dive deeper into the mythic topics that I discuss on the podcast. So if you listen to The Emerald and you find yourself lamenting when the outro music kicks in and you're wanting more, the patreon community is where to get more. It's where to get more interaction with me, it's where to get more interaction with the jewel than ever. And in times when there are those that seek to repress her, and in times when there are those that seek to repress her, she shines through all the stronger. This episode is for her, for you, the Divine Mother. I've been waiting a long time to do this episode. In fact, to be honest, this was the very first episode I ever thought of doing. There was a time when The Emerald was going to basically be a travelogue of my experiences at\n So, why did I wait so long to do this episode? I waited because I realized that before I could really talk about the goddess, before I could talk about the animate force that infuses everything, before I could talk about the holy tremor that powers the engine of space-time, before I could talk about her and really convey what I want to convey, and perhaps just maybe help open a door that might in some small way allow her to move through. To move through with her anklets ringing. To move through her lightning body blazing, hairs on the neck rising. To move through silently, pervasively, or to move through to the boom of drums and the cries of victory. I had to do some groundwork first. Because there's a lot of cultural clutter around the goddess. The goddess is many things these days. She appears everywhere, her many names are invoked free of context in a hundred thousand ways. She's, what, an empowerment tool, an archetype, a self-help course, a feminist icon. Something we invoke when we want help manifesting more creative energy or material abundance in our lives. Something that, in an individualistic culture, always seems to have a whole lot to do with us. Mood, tweets Katy Perry, along with a picture of Goddess Kali, tongue protruding, flames blazing. Author Elizabeth Gilbert, one medium writer tells us, is a Saraswati-inspired woman because, you know, she's good at landing book deals. Is this her? Is this the goddess? In a postmodern, decontextualized world, she too has been postmodernized and decontextualized. Removed from the ecstatic, felt context in which most of her ritual adoration takes place. She's been psychologized, you know, flattened into an archetype. Yet, when was the last time your neck hairs rose for an archetype? When was the last time you wept for an archetype? When was the last time you were brought to your knees for an archetype? She's been politicized, assumed to be some kind of symbol for a particular set of beliefs and worldviews and isms, when, in living reality, she is greater, vaster, more dynamic, more confounding than any limited ism could ever be. She's been sanitized, the trance convulsions, the cries of anguish and ecstasy, the sacrifice, the blood, very specifically the blood, which is her medium, her matrix, her realm, removed neatly from view. She's been individualized, made into something that exists for us, like it's all about what she can do for us, like the power of the universe only matters insofar as it can benefit my personal journey of empowerment, whatever that is, in the face of the power of all that is. She's been commodified, like five ways to make the goddess work for you, ancient Vedic goddess mantras to increase your financial well-being, you know, all that. And possibly most consequentially, she's been deanimated, placed on the unattainable pedestal of conceptuality. So Saraswati becomes a symbol for something, abstracted, analyzed, she becomes an idea, a principle, a philosophical musing, Vak Saraswati, the animate force itself, the speech of the cosmos that moves through rivers and through the mouths of lowing cows and the throats of all who speak and sing becomes a concept, imagine that. But the goddess, the power, Shakti, is not a concept. Munilaswamy writes, quote, her movements are felt, her voice is heard, her presence is experienced, she is a felt reality and not simply an object of conjecture. So I realized that before I spoke of her and did her any justice at all, I had to set a slow and deliberate foundation over many episodes, a foundation of animacy. Animacy as the substrate of existence, as the way things are, the normative way of perceiving a living, breathing, all-permeating, energized cosmos of being. The goddess traditions are animist and the goddess is the animating force itself. The living breath that powers nature, drains and fills watersheds, swells clouds, satiates bellies, raises goose bumps and expresses back to source as song, as dance, as poetic meter. The goddess lives in vast interconnected geographies of stones and trees, in thundering rivers in the Ganga and the Yamuna and the Kaveri. She rises as bubbling springs at Kamakhya and as naturally occurring flames at Jwalamuki. And to speak of her, I had to speak first of the relationship of animate forces to places, where the goddess is inseparable from the place. She is Meenakshi, Chintpurni, Kamakshi, Kamakhya, these are all goddesses and they are places. Every place that we turn our loving attention, in fact, one could say, there is a goddess. There is the goddess. Every place we turn our loving attention. To speak of her, I had to speak first of the relationship of animacy and trance. The animate power, the living fact of a universe and ecology of animate being, is realized in trance, in states of utter absorption. It is realized, navigated, in what Tyson Yankaporta calls the ancestral mind. Exhausted after the dance, the run, the eight-hour ritual, the four-hour kirtan, the long search for food in the desert, the thoughts melt away and we see her suddenly everywhere. We know her through trance. Light trance, like a sweet hum of dragonflies on a summer day, or full trance, trance possession it's sometimes called, full trance, all across the Indian subcontinent. She bends and squeezes her way into her devotees, forcing the shrieks and yelps of high trance out of quivering mouths, ridden by the goddess, taken by the lion. She is trance possession itself. When one is in trance, they say, it is her. To speak of her, I had to speak of consciousness and how consciousness is experienced in mystic states. For the patterns, tunnels, vortexes, axes, luminosities, nectars, vibrational currents and humming architectures that we experience in heightened consciousness are her playing field. This is her at play. For as some say, she is the eternal, vibrant pulse of consciousness itself. To speak of her, I had to speak of hums and invocations. And I had to hum and invoke, I had to hum to speak of her. I had to hum for she is sonic. I had to speak of resonance for she is resonance. The goddess is devani, is resonance, says the Netra Tantra. When we lock in, entrain, resonate with ecology, with community, with cosmos, our hearts entraining to the larger world, this is her. When something resonates, it's her resonating. The reflective power itself, vibrating. So to speak of her, I had to first speak of hums and resonances and of nectars. And I had to speak of light and luminous focal points. I had to speak of the moon, yes, I had to speak of lunar cycles and vegetation for she is vegetative power. The force that Dylan Thomas said lights the green fuse. She is neem and fig and banyan and tulsi and kadamba. And to properly honor her vegetative power, I had to speak of planting and harvest. I had to speak of the festivals that are infused with her plants and her songs for she is known through the festivals that celebrate her. She moves more freely through the bodies of her devotees at festivals. She is aroused at festivals, ready to carry us off into union at festivals. To speak of her, beloved, I had to speak of this world of birth and death, of want and lack. To speak of her, beloved, I had to speak of sacrifice, for it is on her altar that all things that breathe and blink are born and die. I had to speak of blood, beloved, of life, death, incarnation, the matrix of her dominion. I had to speak, beloved, I had to speak of longing. I had to speak of longing. What if that great want we feel, what if that great want were itself alive, a being. What if when we feel the longing to be plunged into the seamless unity of nature, to be immersed in a great totality, when we long to feel ourselves inseparably fused to the cosmos.\n That longing, that great longing, that greatest of longings, that longing and the object of longing itself are both her. So, everything that I've spoken of on this podcast in relation to trance, to animism, to mythosomatics, to resonance, to place and context and vegetation and festivals lives in the beating heart of her traditions, is alive and well in the goddess traditions of India. I had to set the foundation so that when at last I devoted an episode entirely to her, you would know that I'm not speaking about an abstract principle. I'm not speaking of an archetype. I'm speaking of the animate power itself. The tremor, the expansion, the bend and the sway, the power. So now at last we can speak of her. Now at last we can speak of you, Ma. Now at last we can speak of you. Now at last you arrive for us. And I'm speaking of you, Mother Power. I'm speaking of you. Anklets ringing through the void of space-time. Anklets ringing through the void of space-time. I'm speaking of you. I'm speaking about the goddess in full recognition that I'm not a lineage holder in her traditions or even really a scholar of any note. I'm speaking as an outsider who has been fortunate enough to be invited into her spaces through the graciousness of her gatekeepers. And there in those spaces, I felt something. And in feeling something, I was inspired, as is the way with those in whom she stirs the great longing. I was inspired to sing back. So this is me singing back. This is me singing back to you, Ma. Singing back along with my friend who graciously has agreed to do some singing for this episode. Singing back. And to be clear, I'm not speaking from any place of authority. I'm speaking so that from the years that I've spent journeying to her sacred places and learning from her devotees and hearing her and the bhajan sung to her and the drum sounded to her and glimpsing her and stones and trees and rivers, perhaps speaking of her today, we can evoke the slightest shimmer or tremor that has within it a hint of the feeling of her. Why? Because we need her. We need the animate force to wake us up to remind us that we are alive. To remind us that we breathe this living breath and we sing with broken voice and we long with hearts that want nothing ultimately more than to be drawn into you. All the relentless categorizations and decontextualizations and monetizations and fractures and fissures and anxieties and tensions and pointless conversations. All the frustrations, rumors of war among nations, traumas, humiliations, degradations, machinations we go through telling ourselves this is what I want. Know this. Know this. And if only this then chasing that eternal idealization. And meanwhile the gulf between us and other, between dweller and neighbor, between brain and body, mind and heart deepens, widens, aggravations, justifications, and all the while what we really long for, what we really long for is to be melted in her unifying gaze. To be melted in her unifying gaze. To remember the living breath at the heart of all things and to construct our lives around it. And to honor it. And to sing to it. To sing our way home. Sing our way home. Why must we find this connection to the animate? Because in an age of attention wars and technology induced slumber, saturated with the relentless hypnotic drone of devices, she shakes us awake. Reminds us where we are, what's important, what's sacred, where to turn our attention. Reminds us what a place really is. A place, remember, a place. A non-digital space. A space draped in hibiscus, steeped in butter and oil, illuminated with flame, adorned with our loving attention. A place with eyes. This world is a place with eyes. Where do we take our eyes in this place? Can we pry ourselves away from the screen and take our gaze to meet hers? To meet the animate? To meet the eyes of the world? In an age of polarized, punitive, linear discourse, she says, remember poetry. Remember poetry. This alone is a strong rudder to help us navigate the torrential waves. Remember poetry. And the moment we see the poetry slipping from discourse, reevaluate whether that is discourse that's worth having. In an age in which we seem to have decided that the end of the story has already been written, that late-stage capitalism is the way of all ways, that the world would rather eat itself than change, she asks us to remember. Remember that the hollow, unstruck part of the world still dreams. Remember that where time leads us is a mystery. Remember that the end of the story has not in any way been written. That the next breath is the great unknown. Remember the imagination, the dream, the trance, the hum, the totem, the stone, the fire, the power, the flaming net, as the Kubjika Mata Tantra says, of her energies, the triple halo of her energies, the incandescence of her energies, the victorious roar of her energies. She asks us to remember infinite nature and speak with her, sing to her, feel her breath upon our ears. Because ultimately, everything, absolutely everything we do in this life, this body, this breath, this song, all of it is an evocation of her. All this is her listening to her. This is her gazing back at her. This is her humming to her. This is her entranced forever by her. This is for you, oh resonance, oh goddess. For you, the divine mother of the universe. The goddess is the animate force today on the Emerald. Just like that old country song says, I still remember the broken road that led me right to you. It was literally a broken road, full of potholes and gravel. I can see it. In my memory, it extends out into the horizon, winding through the green Karnataka rice fields, the late afternoon monsoon light like sacrificial butter. A herd of goats scatters in front of my motorcycle, scrambles off the road, little hooves trampling through the foliage, and the air is suddenly filled with the scent of wild mint. Further, this broken road opens up into wide sugarcane fields. It's harvest time, the sugarcane is burning, the scent is smoky and sweet. Where was I going? I had no idea. I was getting deliberately lost. I was in India for\n The study was over by early in the day, so my daily ritual became to take my rented motorcycle and go as far into the backcountry, into the villages as possible, and find whatever I could find. I followed my intuition. It had done me well so far, it had led me into verdant fields dotted with white egrets and hidden shrines. It had led me to an impromptu and comical lunch with a goat herder, neither of us speaking a word of the other's language. It led me to a lost stone Rama temple overgrown with jungle creepers. On those long rides I felt the freedom of wind on my skin, the freedom of no clear destination. But I also knew that under the skin was an anxiousness. I was searching for something, a reunion of some kind perhaps, with a force that I did not yet know. So I took any road that led into the unknown. Looking back now I can say I was pretty restless then, but I can feel nothing but gratitude for that spark of restlessness now. Because whatever its source, and whatever it was seeking, it led me right to you. I rode through many miles of farmland until finally I came to a small village. I parked my bike in a little dirt roundabout and walked towards the center. I was greeted there by a crowd of rowdy school kids who wanted to practice their English. They asked me my name, my country, I answered. We chatted until a different question came. It came from a girl probably nine years old or so. As the others ran out of English phrases to bounce around she tugged my sleeve and looked up at me and asked, Do you want to meet the goddess? I've learned a few things about India in the many years I've been traveling there. There are sometimes clues and signs. When a question like that hangs in the air, it's good to pay attention. Do I want to meet the goddess? Of course I want to meet the goddess. Yes, I replied. She and a friend led me down an alleyway of small houses. I remember a goat munching on a shrub. I remember hay stacked high on mud walls. Then there's a house on the left with a green door. It looks no different than the other houses except that perhaps it has a larger entranceway. She points me to the door, gestures for me to go in. I slip off my shoes and leave them to the side. I walk through the threshold. It's dark in there. My eyes adjust slowly. And the first thing I see are other eyes. Many pairs of eyes. There's about 20 people in the room seated on the floor. Their focus directed to a curtained off area where a man is chanting to what looks like a mound of earth. A mound of earth draped in flowers. A simple mound of earth saturated in turmeric and vermilion. A mound of earth with eyes. I want to tell you what happened that day. I want to tell you exactly what happened, with no exaggerations. There's no need to make it into anything more than it was, for ultimately it was something very simple. Something in certain parts of the world very common. The fact that it was uncommon for me doesn't make it exotic or something that needs to be overblown into something else. What happened was simple. What happened was this. There was a moment. A shriek came from somewhere in the room. A hand slapped the earth hard. I was suddenly aware that around me bodies were convulsing and shaking as the cries continued. There were shrieks, chirps. There was glossalia speaking in tongues. I can't describe it to you more fully because my head had somehow been forcibly bowed. My chin had dropped and it felt like a weight was pushing down on the top of my head and I couldn't move my head. I couldn't even raise my eyes to look at the curtained off area and the mound with eyes. Because at that moment, at that moment, that would have been like trying to stare directly into the sun. Let me ask you something. Have you ever felt something so vast and so holy that you dare not even lift your gaze to look at it? There was no rational reason why I shouldn't be able to move my head. There was no rational reason why tears should be streaming down my face. There was no rational reason why a mound of earth should be generating such a deep somatic response. Yet, that's what happened. This earth, remember, is alive. This earth is a place with eyes. In the years that I'd studied spiritual traditions, this was something different than I'd encountered before. I'd been raised in animist traditions, but always through what you could call a modern conceptual veneer. I'd certainly felt things, presences at springs, voices in the breeze. But this was so directly tangible, undeniable, a fierce, vibrant, living animity. An animosity realized through trance, through direct felt experience, through direct living transmission. And it changed my life. After that day, I began to seek out the goddess more intentionally, and I've done so ever since. I embarked on an ongoing journey that led me to dozens of her well-known sacred sites and also led me to seek her out in groves and forests and villages, out-of-the-way places. And the more I began to look, the more I started to see that she was everywhere. She is everywhere. She is the substratum of the world, says the Chandipattha, the abiding force of the universe. And so, the goddess forms the living substrate of the traditions of the Indian subcontinent. She lives as a living, breathing network of song and story and ritual, embedded in land and place, reinvigorated with the mythology of that land and place. She lives in snake holes and mounds and rivers and creeks, on ridges, on mountaintops, at places where seas meet. She expresses the way that the animate force has been seen to express in traditional cultures all across the world as the very forces of nature, the river, the owl, the alligator. Her body, inseparable from the natural world, her as shapeshifter, mistress of animal powers. The Kaula-Nyana-Nirnaya describes shapeshifting yoginis wandering the earth in the form of doves, vultures, swans, owls, cranes, peacocks, jackals, goats, cats, tigers, elephants, snakes. The Skanda Purana gives a list of 64 yoginis, many with half bird or animal bodies. The yoginis live in the sky, on earth, in water and in space. Animate forces, a living, animate geography of nature goddesses, linked together with stories and songs, joined through a mythic anatomy based around the fallen body of the mother goddess herself. For her body was burned in a great fire. Have you heard? The body of the mother goddess was burned in a great fire. And her divine lover, arriving too late, lifted a single one of her charred bones to his lips, as Stanisaw Tymocena poetically imagines, and blew. And the sound that echoed throughout all creation and became all creation was Uma. Uma. Uma. Her. As Shiva began his wild dance of mourning, her body fell to the earth. Her charred hair landed at Chamundi Devi, where I saw her once, adorned in silver and pink hibiscus. Her right hand landed at Bahchariji, so bright, so, so bright, where the Hidras shout blessings at pilgrims from beneath an old varakadi tree. Her heart landed at Ambaji, her unstruck heart, where her devotees pound on drums and shout victory to the mother, and where some say there is a yantra, etched in gold, that no one, no one has ever seen. Her windpipe landed at Nalateshwari, her earrings at Vishalakshi, her breasts at Taratarini, her tongue at Jwalamukhi, where she speaks in the blazing language of fire. Her womb landed at Kamakhya, where her waters run red, her ears at Brajeshwari, where she rested and cleaned her wounds, after the great battle with Mahishasura.\n Within this sacred geography, anatomy, live countless thousands of local animate goddesses, countless thousands of heaps of earth with eyes, countless snake holes, countless goddess trees, countless Tulsi shrines, countless ornamented stones, each a repository of story and song, each a portal into a place of rapture, a geography, a living geography of rapture. In many places like rural Himachal Pradesh, you can walk from goddess shrine to goddess shrine for miles upon miles, always at least one goddess shrine within sight, and all throughout this geography, the medium through which she is realized, felt, beheld, conjoined with, is trance. As Frederick Smith says in The Self-Possessed, transpossession is far, far more widespread than is often acknowledged. A recent study in Andhra Pradesh showed that one-third of the rural population experienced states of transpossession in goddess rituals. Gavin Flood in The Tantric Body says that all Indian meditative and absorptive traditions are refinements in one way or another of transpossession, and he's got refinements in quotes so we don't think that one is higher than the other. Sri Padma in her book Vicissitudes of the Goddess speaks of the ubiquitous presence of trance and village ritual as it forms the living medium through which the goddess is communed with all across the subcontinent. At this point, I've seen this firsthand in dozens upon dozens of places. There are signs to follow, a language to look for, places to know where and when to go. Aroused, the goddess wakes up within her devotees' very bodies. The animate force that lives in springs and owls and tulsi trees also lives in each one of us. She is present in the heart, the texts say. Residing in the head, she lives in the spine as Kundalini. She dwells in the energy centers of the body. I bow to the goddess abiding in the heart, the belly, the tips of the fingers, the toes, and the head. This sacred anatomy is hers. The sense organs, say the Nitya Sadashi Karnava, are little drops of the great ocean of her bliss. And when she wakes up, things happen. As the Devatma Shakti says, quote, when the goddess is aroused, she is felt in many ways. These include bodily shaking, involuntary deep breathing, trembling, hair standing on end, laughing, weeping, stammering, involuntary postures, fixation of sight and waves of bliss. The person may hear various sorts of music, bells, drums, the buzzing of bees, the strumming of stringed instruments. There may be vibrations within the spinal cord, a lack of feeling in the body or intense feeling in the body, leading to apparent intoxication or convulsions. The body may fall to the floor and rotate like a grinding wheel. The person may jump from place to place, assuming the form of animals, making the sounds of jackals, dogs, tigers, birds. The world may resonate with mantras and the person may feel currents of breath energy traveling through his or her body. Currents of breath energy, so the goddess is not an abstract philosophy. She is named in the Kumari Kakandaha with names like lightning mouth, upraised hair, shaker, force of the wind. She shakes, attracts, paralyzes, bends, convulses, seizes, absorbs, transports, illuminates, heats, liberates. She is dynamism. She's realized through ecstatic union, felt communion, through dance, through song, through drumming. The goddess, it is said, quote, likes the sound of drumming. She is present in sound and is called the word. She is speech. She is found in the form of praise. The praise that rings out to her in the form of countless mantras and bhajans and slokas is, in fact, her. She is the very sonic waves that move through those inspired to raise their voices to her. As flood waters surge through a canyon, as sound swells through a violin, this whole place is her singing in praise of her. The mongrel howl of dogs fighting over scraps at the cremation ground, the orchestras of Lincoln Center, her singing in praise of her. The great goddess, says Kshemaraja's commentary on the Netra Tantra, is of the nature of sound and resonance, the supreme energy of activity. She is in the form of all that speaks and utters. She is the source of all incantation, all poetic refrain, all song. She is present everywhere, like fire is present in wood. Do you hear? She lives humming like the latent fire in the oak, the latent fire in the elm, the latent fire in the tamarind, like the latent fire in you, beloved, like the latent fire in you. She is humming as the latent fire in you. From Jeffrey Litke, quote, this is the goddess who causes trembling through rhythm. She is the emittive power who gives rise to creation, awakens the kundalini shakti, produces states of possession, and invigorates the sociocultural mandala through ritual, music, and dance. It is no accident that shamans seek to be possessed by Tripurasundari, the goddess, in drumming-induced states of altered consciousness. It is no accident that the Nichisodashi Karnava is a manual for installing her sacred sounds upon the body, end quote, for she is known through sound. Hmm, that goddess of speech, says the kundalini sthava, is as intoxicating as the sound of millions of drums. She vibrates like millions of swarms of bees. She is the controller of the vital breath and the queen of my life. The queen of my life. Suravaravarshini durdharadharshini durmukhamarshini harsharate trivuvanaposhini shankaratoshini kilvishamoshini hosharate. Says the Chandapataha, she roars and laughs and rends the sky with her terrifying roar. The oceans tremble at the roar that cannot be contained. The roar is felt in the bodies of those taken by her. Her sounds reverberate through the bodies of those taken by her. For she is, as the 13th century hymn to Malini, the malini sthava, says, she is the power of sound. The assembly of all the sounds. Right? Imagine. The assembly of all the sounds. Her body made of sonic resonance. And she is specifically resonant because she exists beyond our control. Beyond our fathoming. We resonate with her because our hearts leap towards infinity. Towards the great power that reverberates everywhere always all at once. When I started looking for her, I found a body made of countless layers and permutations. Her body made of stories. Her body made of the song sung to her. Her body woven of all the states of consciousness realized by her devotees in rapture. Her body made of the longing of all beings. Imagine a body made of the resonant longing of all beings. The want of the strutting bird of paradise. The want of the newborn reaching for its mother. Fingers clutching for a strand of hair. The want of the sculptor. The want of the newlywed bride. The want of the poet. The want of the warrior. The want of the blind singer. The want of the world. Her body is all the want in the world. This too is her body. Her body transcendent and immanent. Nowhere and everywhere. Tied to places and free from all associations at once. Her body. The power. What do we name it? This power that moves through everything. That is everything. That is why there is something instead of nothing. And is that something itself? That is the dimensionless drop that contained all potentiality and in a moment of profound expansion swelled into a universe that is at latest count two trillion galaxies wide. What do we name it?\n Name this great power, the power that birthed all this. There are many who have called it Her. We speak of Mother Nature, or we speak of the matter that comprises the universe, matter of course being another word for mother, luminous matter, dark matter. We invoke the Mother, the great birthing power of creation, every day without even realizing it. Whenever we say something, matters. All this matters. All this is of the Mother, born of the Mother Power. The Supreme Mother Goddess is the womb of the world, says the Kumari Kakandaha. All that moves and does not move arises there within Her. She is the source of all the infinite powers. Everything emerges from Her womb. O Lady of the womb, the Malini Stava calls to Her. You the ocean of the infinite womb, you are the mother of all living beings. She is the nature of the cause of the entire universe, Kshemaraja says, the shining vigor in all vigorous things. So in the texts that sing her praises, she is directly called nature, and nature of many facets, the one who commands all the energies, nature commanding all the energies, Her. Without Her, the Sundari Lahari says, the universe doesn't even stir. Na je devam devonatha dukha-ana-spaita-npr tastv mrdhym hari hara-virajdi-virapr pranam tu stho tu bhgavata-pnya-prabhavati So the first impulse, the very first stirring that coaxed all of this out of latency, that faintest, that grandest of stirrings, is Her. You are the one who moves in the void, the Malini Stava says. Imagine, the vast womb of space-time, imagine, something stirred, something moved, and became all this, all this, the quote, mother of the assembly of all things, adorned in every color, the bird of paradise, the cirrus cloud, the artist brush, the meditator and the object of meditation and the act of meditating, She of infinite forms. So She is everywhere, in everything, the omnipresent energy of the universe that quote, goes on forever, the one who is endless and everywhere, both transcendent and immanent. Transcendent and immanent, what does that mean? It means that She is tangible reality, present in the whoosh of the air that we breathe, the gurgle of water that flows, and the hum of the thoughts that we think. And yet, She is completely beyond our fathoming, beyond time and space. Three-dimensional beings cast our slender lines into the vast ocean of space-time, trying to latch onto something that sticks. In the latest thinking, a full 85% of the universe is dark matter, which of course we have only theorized and have never actually touched or smelt or rubbed our faces against, which is another way of saying that there's a whole lot of mystery out there that we still cannot begin to comprehend. In fact, a new major study just came out questioning whether dark matter even exists at all. Where does that leave us? It leaves us, as Her great devotee Ram Prasad said, like ants trying to grasp the moon. To this day, says the Nitya Sadashi Karnava, even the gods know not a thing about Her. What is She? From where did She arise? Where does She reside? By what was She created, the gods ask. We measure what we can measure within the limitations of five senses and the help of rudimentary tools, yet the source, the why, the hum of it, the smallness of that final particle that we'll never find, the borders of the universe that we'll never chart, the moment of creation that we'll never see despite how many nanoseconds we shave off, remains gloriously, thankfully, graciously a mystery. Thank you, great goddess, for remaining a mystery. Thank you for staying hidden from us, for that allows us to long for you. Namaskaram. What we fathom of Her, everything we can think or know or suppose or dream about the universe, still doesn't hint at who She ultimately is. It still doesn't poke into Her dimensionless core. Being without the markings of space and time, says the Nitya Sadashi Karnava, She is that cosmic pulsation which is the totality. She is nameless, says the Kumari Kakandaha. She is the vibratory power of consciousness itself in the sphere of the nameless. All names point at Her but do not even begin to describe Her entirely. As Trevor Hall sings, all of creation is only Her face. Which is why She is also called She who wears time as an ornament, and why some sing to Her as She who swallows time. She is time and space and beyond time and space at once. Imminently graspable, as close as a lover's touch. And unfathomable as the question, how big is the universe? Or, why? Why? You are the pillar of the universe, says the Malini Stava. The light of the radiant energy of the fire of time. It calls Her extremely fine, as fine as the half-eye twinkle of a fraction of a moment. The half-eye twinkle of a fraction of a moment. Sometimes when my one-year-old looks back at me from his highchair, I catch a glimpse of a bright little pinpoint in his eye. You know that bright pinpoint? Imagine all the gleaming pinpoints in all the eyes of all the creatures in all the world. Chameleon eyes, crab eyes, peacock eyes, manta ray eyes, falcon eyes. A shining universal network of eyes. This, too, is Her body, shimmering and dreaming. All that shimmers is Her shimmering. She is radiant, say the texts, flame-like. She shines permanently, shining through all things. Quote, by my awakening alone, the living beings awaken. The things pulse, speak, expand, and contract. So, yes, all of it, we can say, is Her. The animate force, the power, shakti, the power. She is the ruler of all, they say. A revelation that caused the Bengali saint Ramakrishna, who was known for going into paroxysms of ecstasy merely at the mention of Her name, caused him to proclaim, all of this is within the jurisdiction of shakti. When we think, I'm sitting, I'm meditating, all of that is shakti. All of that is Her. Her jurisdiction is complete. The vibratory power of nature encompasses each one of us. The great goddess is all-pervasive, says the Ghamari Kakandaha. She is present in each and everything. She is the fierce wave present in the body, and in all bodies, energized by Her own nature. Feel into it, the fierce wave in all bodies. And this is right at the heart of starting to understand Her, to feel Her. She moves in waves, in pulses, pulses that we feel. The point is to feel Her. The point is not for Her to live as a detached image far away on an altar, or as some kind of ghost.\n The point is to feel her. All of her traditions are aiming us towards an experiential moment. All the singing about nectars and buzzing bees and crystalline light, all the invocation of fierce waves and void spaces and overflowing points and thunderous roars and reflective moons, all are for us to experience her directly. To go into the state of conjunctive consciousness as the Netra Tantra is to be plunged into her who knows and does everything. So, again, feel into this a bit and feel how this is so semantically and somatically different than, you know, I sat down on my nice little meditation cushion and practiced mindfulness for a few minutes and all of it was very internal and nice and mostly was just me kind of sitting with me. That's a very different feeling than to go into the conjunctive space is to be plunged into her, to be plunged into rapturous union with a greater animacy. We have sanitized the meditative moment. We have diminished the vastness of the meditative moment, which also neatly and clearly allows us to make the meditative moment all about us, something that we can neatly and tidily control. We talk about flow states a lot on this podcast. These days, flow states are all the rage, as I'm sure you know. You know, find flow while working at home, flow states and big tech's quest to dominate the world, etc., etc. And so what are flow states? Ultimately, in this understanding, the flow state is to be plunged into her, to be carried into her, to be taken away into the great flowing forever, which is her. And so a culture of what you could call holy recognition exists around these states in their traditional context. They're not tools. They are communion with something deeper and vaster than we can even comprehend. It doesn't matter if we can define them through brain chemistry. That is secondary. What's far more important to understand is that the entry across her threshold, through her door, into her shimmering vastness, has consequences and implications far, far beyond how we harness our potentiality, far, far beyond what we call self-help, far beyond our bank accounts, and even far beyond our individual psychological well-being. Implications like, how do I interact with a world that ultimately is going to sacrifice everything I love on the altar of time? Right? Or, once I behold the infinite heart of everything, what do I do? Do I launch a high-performance DMT toad medicine startup? And what is that? Why has that become the be-all, end-all of everything that we can imagine out of the absorptive state, the tiniest glimpse of eternity by culturally programmed minds that can only grok things in terms of their potential for monetization? Like that meme going around says about Westerners having their first spiritual experience, and they're like, I think I see a career here. Right? But the real invitation of her, the animate force, the mother goddess known as the flow state, known as the shaker, known as the swallower of time, known as she of the bristling upraised hair, the real invitation is something far, far deeper. For ultimately the flow is between us transitory beings and the infinite. The resonance we feel in flow is ultimately between us and that which is vaster and greater than us. Conjunctive union with nature, the great birther and devourer, that we might glimpse her and feel her and commit to a deep reciprocal relationship with her, with nature itself. That her garland of energies, space, time, light, animacy, life, might surge through us and wake us up to her presence, to the joy and the beauty that is right here, right now. This garland of energies is tangible and real, carefully accessed by those who have inherited an uninterrupted knowledge stream dating back perhaps to Paleolithic times of how to access her. Her practices are intricate and precise, simple sometimes, dazzling, from tantric meditations in which the sounds sacred to her are vibrationally installed within the body of the practitioner to traditions in which devotees suffer pain for her, piercing their tongues or cheeks or backs with barbs as they contact her in the deep trance state. And it's worth noting in this day and age that her traditions are not just wild free-form abandon. There are deep protocols for accessing her, just as there are deep protocols of animacy in every animous tradition I've ever encountered. There is discipline, there is heat, there is friction, there are things that we must rub up against, obstacles that must be slowly melted away, and that takes repetition. Willingness to show up, even when we don't want to show up. The message of the wild goddess is not simply go be wild or do whatever you feel. It's actually often the opposite. Cultivate deeply, over time, through the heartbeat of repetition, a good container, a space for her to dance. Satsang with Mooji Traditionally her practices are transmitted within a matrix, which is another word for her. A matrix of context, by those who have been fully plunged into her mysteries. Not simply read about her or did their doctorate on her. And these practices are not anything resembling what we call self-help. Despite what you read on Medium, they generally have nothing to do with harnessing the power of Saraswati to help you write that next novel. They don't come as personal betterment courses and snackable morsels packaged for our amusement. They're not trophies or adornments or status symbols. They're not designed to make us feel better about ourselves. If anything, they're designed to get us out of the way completely. To find the conditions necessary, through repetitive recitation almost to the point of exhaustion, to access, at last, that which matters. That which matters. Mother. Matter. So, yeah, us as we know us, our wants and needs aren't exactly the important part. And this is perhaps the hardest for Western minds to grasp. She's not here to do something for us. To take time off from creating and crushing universes to intervene and help us with a job interview or manifesting a spa vacation. Can we imagine, can we strip away the cultural conditioning for just one moment and imagine giving our offering, our time, our attention, our care to something that has nothing to do with our own career advancement or the reinforcement of our own identity? If anything, our task, those of us who pay lip service to wanting to be more aligned to natural currents and rhythms, is to evaluate and measure if we are living a life that is aligned to her. To her cycles. That allows us access to the deep support of her currents and her energies. That feels connected to the breath of the earth and sky and atmosphere. Within which the sun of her right eye and the moon of her left comes shining through. Ahasu te samyam tavanayanam arkaatma kathayah Triyamam vamam te srujati rajaninaya kathayah Tritiyate drishtir daragamitah evam bhujaruchi Samadhatte sandhyam divasanishayorantarachari What is self-help, the sages might ask, when the only true help is to be found at her feet, singing her name? What does this mean? It means that she is the unstoppable current of space, time, energy, ancestry and nature. And we can either seek to construct our lives in tune with her harmonic forces, understanding when to surrender, when to let go, when to plant and when to harvest, when to commit and when to move on, or we can swim against the tide of this life over and over again. Ruled by the most fleeting of currents are thoughts, agitations and embedded patterning. It means that, like it or not, no matter what shiny objects we surround ourselves with and what stories we tell about ourselves and who we hang out with and what our career trajectories are, this body, woven of the matter of the mother, is born, it ages and it dies. And in that process we are not the decider. My youngest son is turning one. My wife grew him in her belly, out of her own body.\n But where did he come from, really? Where did he come from, this little one who now wraps his fingers gently around mine? What is the force that grew him from one cell to a trillion, that grew him into a being that now moves with fingers? The delicate, electrified latticework of fingers? How on earth does that intricate architecture unfold? That sublime artistry is not ours. It's the dominion of the finer forces of the universe, the providence of nature, of time and space and light, all of which are names for her. Her, her, the light beyond lights, as she is called, or the roar of time. For as much as she is the birth of the universe, she is also its end. The doomsday fire, in whose presence the billion-year journey of our ancestors, the trials and tribulations and joys and pains of the tens of thousands of mothers and grandmothers, is nothing, not even a grain of her foot dust. Where is self-help within that? Sure, I can sign a book deal and go learn to make fresh ravioli and claim it's a spiritual journey. She doesn't care. She doesn't care about the feelings of confidence I get when I slay it in a business meeting. She doesn't care about Instagram pictures of me in crow pose or about the progress I'm making in headstand. And this is the most difficult of all. She probably doesn't pick sides and causes. She doesn't necessarily favor Democrats over Republicans or socialists over capitalists, for her body is made of all contradictions at once. She upends all our notions of what power actually is. She is time. Time itself. Who does time favor? All are born and all die within her providence, and all have a seat at her table should they choose to undertake the necessary protocols to get there. But to get there often means crushing our dearly held isms. And these days, how many are willing to do that? How many are willing to have their isms crushed? But all of us, all of us can look forward to having our isms crushed equally beneath her feet. Or instead, we can die desperately holding onto those isms, begging to be allowed to keep just one. Can I just keep one construct? Until all are stripped away in a great act of universal devouring. All of us, without exception, are her sacrifice victims. So she is called the one who loves sacrifice, and she who laughs at those caught in the wheel of transmigratory existence. She takes the heads of all, white supremacists and trans activists and corporate CEOs alike, and she strings them as a garland around her neck. And we're left to shake our fists at her in that most futile of gestures, that of a four-year-old gazing up at their mother and proclaiming, but that's not fair. And this gets at what very few of the goddess-as-empowerment-tool crowd or the self-help yoginis want to ultimately admit. The divine mother is terrifying. The divine mother is absolutely, unequivocally terrifying. She is a crone, described with withered skin, a walking skeleton. Stare into the eyes of the emaciated Chamundi statue at Kamakhya Devi temple and tell me what you see. She is horrible, say the texts, horrible with bulging red eyes. She drinks blood and wears corpses as earrings and lives in a hut made of human skin perched on a pile of bones on the periphery of civilization. She lives in the cremation ground with her host of accompanying energies, blood drinkers and skull bearers. She asks us to stare into the immutable fact of death, to stare into everything we don't want to look at, to stare into the coldness of eternity, and to not flinch. And I encounter Westerners who ask this a lot. Why is Kali so terrifying? Why is there so much gruesome imagery? Why all the blood? Why are there dead people? Welcome to the world. Nature is built on death. Death is all around us all the time. Everything that grows in the forest grows on the dead bodies of what came before. Nature is terrifying. Time is terrifying. Tell me you're not terrified of time, who will snuff you and your whole tribe out in an instant. Tell me you're not terrified of nature. If you're not terrified of nature with, you know, that reverential terror of holy awe, then you probably haven't actually lived in nature, felt the consequences when a Himalayan storm changes direction, or when a crop fails, or when pox sweeps through the valley. Nature is terrifying. She is horrific, says the Kumari Kakandaha. She burns without smoke, like the flame on the wick of a lamp, shining like countless millions of roaring, howling gods. Her roaring laugh sends the gods trembling, they say. The Malini Stava calls to her, oh terrible one, oh mistress, savior of the triple world, oh you of the formidable howl who laughs at the comedy of the wheel of existence, the most fierce of the fierce, your form is ferocious, your glance is terrifying. Many describe the sheer intensity associated with being her devotee. Trance practitioners in the Kali traditions of Kerala describe the heat, pain, shivers, tremors, the surges of almost unmanageable emotion when being taken by her into trance. And with such pain involved, wouldn't we avoid her at all costs? Yet after establishing her as horrible, ferocious, the Malini Stava then implores, gaze upon me, gaze upon me here, you of the lion's gaze. The place of mother as devourer, of nature as ruler-controller of all, is terrifying, but it's a place we long to be taken. For it is the place where we can, at last, get out of our own way, get out of our heads, at last. The great place the hymn speaks of is the place of the truth of our own powerlessness before time. We are totally and utterly powerless before time. Have you noticed all those tributes on social media? Those tributes to rock stars that meant something to us that are now dying? To actors and actresses that are dying? To business leaders and activists? Those posts seem to be increasing, don't they? Why? Because everyone's dying. Welcome to matter. Welcome to the mother. Welcome to the doomsday fire. She rules everything unequivocally, and all we can do, really, is learn what graceful, repetitive surrender means. The ongoing, regular practice of surrender. The discipline of surrender, one of my course participants recently called it. And when, at last, we surrender, when at last we surrender, when at last we let go, then we find, of course, that she is what? The gentlest, most loving mother of all. She is the one who infuses the universe with rose-colored hues. She breastfeeds the universe, the texts say. She is the protectress, the savioress, the one who shuttles us across the torrent. In her form as Kanaka Lakshmi, devotees pour streams of fragrant milk over a statue of her made of cool silver. I saw the rainwater pouring into her temple at Kamakshi Amund. A momentary glimpse of a crescent moon shining in the dark. A sugarcane stalk. All things sweet and fruitful blossoming in fragrant darkness. I saw her feet soaked in vermilion at Kamakhya, adorned in white jasmine. She is beauty itself. Beauty, the first outflow of this variegated world. Beauty that comes with differentiation. She is proportion, symmetry, art, love.\n From the Gnaneshwari, quote, All art springs from her. All learning comes from her. She is the chamber in which all sound is produced, the treasure house of all marvels. In fact, all things arise from the play of her power. The manifestation and dissolution of the universe are her morning and evening. Enough has been said. She is the great enchantress. The great enchantress, so she is the muse, the poetic, artistic, creative force itself, infinitely creative in a world of infinite creativity. The mother, the power, scintillant green of the mallard feather. The mother, the power. Did you hear her? Did you hear her? In the sound of morning thunder. When was it, beloved, that we woke to the sound of morning thunder? All green things spiraling towards the power. All green things spiraling towards the power. All green things spiraling towards the power. This whole universe, says Timosina, including yourself, is her body of love projected as universal flux. Like an artist or a musician, the goddess becomes inspired. Her spanda shakti, that's her vibrational power, stirs and she desires to create. Having nothing on which to create, the goddess, like a spider, must give rise to her canvas by producing it from her own being. So her body, her very nature itself, is the creative impulse, the vibrational power of infinite creativity. And our work is to allow that impulse to move through us and to offer back to her, to honor this world through the carefully cultivated instrument of our being. The Sundari Lahari says, This crimson gold-hued goddess shines like the rays of the rising sun in the minds of poets. Stimulating their poetry forth, their words surge like erotic waves emanating from the goddess of speech herself. Satsang with Mooji Satsang with Mooji Erotic waves, waves of longing as the scintillant force of creation moves through us as creative power. O goddess of longing, cries the Malini Stava, you whose form is heated liquid gold. Longing, eros, kama, the force of desirous longing that splits the oneness into manyness, is her. And those waves of longing, still pulsing from the moment of creation like sparks, still hot from the explosive moment of differentiation itself, pulse through us as our own longing to reunite with that oneness again. So her body is the body of all things that live separate from one another and long to be united again. Her body is the song of differentiation itself. And that song revels in the simultaneous separation and union we feel as beings that live in a universe we are part of and yet feel apart from. Can you feel that resonance, that vibrancy, that burning ember? I am part of this world. I feel separate from this world. I am part of this world. I feel separate from this world. All of that longing is her. Not just the resolution of it, not just the union, the separation too. She lives in all beings, says the Chandipata, in the form of longing. So her devotees are love-stricken poets, longing for that from which they feel maddeningly apart. The love-stricken poets long for her, search for her. This poet sighs deeply. Where is this brilliant lady, this black light beyond all luminosity, sings Ram Prasad. And then, I'll die of this mental anguish. My story is unbelievable. This son of the universal mother is dying of hunger pangs. You called me and called me. You took me on your lap and then dashed my heart to the ground. And who of us hasn't felt this? I felt you, beloved nature, beloved universe. I felt you so close. I felt conjoined. I felt one with you. You took me to your lap and then, just like that, I feel separate again. Where did that feeling go? Do we walk around feeling one with everything all the time? No. And a little advice, perhaps. Don't trust anyone who says they feel one with everything all the time. That's not the reality of creatural being in linear time. We feel separate. And yet, the separateness, too, is her. The cry of devotion, the how-could-you-do-this-to-me universe, the cry of oh, terrifying mother, gentle mother, why is all this happening? Why is all this happening to the world? I never thought it would be like this. I never thought it would be like this. This, too, is her. This is her crying to her. Resonance, you feel it? Her crying to her. And this phase of the dance is important. Far more important, perhaps, than an abstract, presumed oneness that is not congruent with the actual pain of separation that all of us, in our own ways, feel. Reveling in the separation is the nature of most devotional music, from bhakti to blues to gospel. You know it, the cry of separation, the cry of take me into your arms, my long-lost love, the cry of the songbird to the monsoon. I am nothing without you. Burn me to cinders, cry the devotional poets, and rub the ash all over your body and then dance. I prefer that to, you know, five simple ways to make the goddess work for you. And you know what? I also prefer it to the whole ultimately I am one with everything all the time thing. So what? How does that help me navigate the actual wave? That makes it far too easy in the modern West for our focus to be turned once again only on ourselves. I am the universe. I am everything. It's all within me. Sure, but how am I in relation to the other, to her, to her, to this world of differentiated forces? I say I want a deeper relationship of reciprocity to nature. Can I maintain a relationship of specificity and depth with that which I am connected to but also separate from? The resonance that flows from songs of longing specifically comes from acknowledging this great force of nature and the animate forces around us as living entities with which we are in an I-you relationship or an I-thou relationship, not just a me-me relationship. And before this degrades into intellectualized non-duality versus duality arguments, just see if you can feel this. I'm speaking of the qualitative difference between all this is me and all this, all this, all this, beloved mother, all this is you, is you. You makes resonance possible. Resonance-pranic flow exists between two. If you want to wake up the animate force, call to her as you. You, aspen tree. You, hidden spring. You, river otter. You, hypericum flower. You. She is shy, bashful, coy, alluring.\n The universe is created, in one story, from the flush and sway of her bashfulness. Her lover pursues her, she bends away. He returns inward, she rushes to embrace him. We feel, each of us, a pull towards the natural world, a pull towards union, that is the same eternal impulse that draws lovers to each other with quickened breath. She is this pull, she causes us to stir. A single arching of her eyebrow, they say, sends the impulses of universal creation firing, stirs the hearts of the staunchest celibate sages. From the Sundari Lahari, after the universe dissolves into void, a single movement from your vine-like eyebrow spurs creation into being again. For she is the daughter, the Kumari Kakandaha tells us, tasked with milking the universe. She coaxes the vibrational power, the longing, out of its latency, quote, you are the goddess that milks the nectar of potentiality from the singularity, and your universal body is flooded with its secretions. So she stirs the vibrational potential out of latency into the full glory of manifestation. She is the longing that causes it and the satiation of it. Wrapped in sensual pleasure, she revels in the majesty of her own creative power. She is eternally self-pleasuring, the one who melts the three worlds as she herself is melted. Her devotees, the Kumari Kakandaha says, experience the temptation of the night of the full moon that arises laden with nectar. The senses are drops of her great ocean, her body is made of touch. Her animate body of stones, of statues, of trees, of conch shells, of pools, of flames, of fragrances, of powders, is adored through touch. She is the one whose limbs are smeared in sandal paste. That paste is applied with devotional abandon, slathered on her knees, her feet, her neck, her forehead. Every day she is washed, slathered, rubbed, smeared in powders, dribbled in butter and oil. She is offered to, her body is made of loving offerings. If you want to know the goddess, if you want to know the animate power, offer her something. And this too is where modern psychological self-help visions about us lose their plot a little bit. The alchemical furnace does not fire if we just show up one day, invoke her name a couple times, and expect her to enhance our lives somehow. The alchemy comes through real, thorough, personal, intricate relationship in which we offer to her again and again. And what do we offer to her? Everything. Traditionally, offerings to her run the full spectrum of energetic density, from rich foods and thick lotus petals to milk, water, flame, to fine curling incense smoke, finer still a continent's worth of hymns and vocalizations, songs, mantras, the blasts of conch shells, shabda, the sacred offering of sound in honor of she who is the source of sound itself. From the cave hermitage of space-time, says the Kamarika Kandaha, she emerges silent and transports all sound, shining brilliant like pure crystal. Finer and finer still, shining like pure crystal. Light is offered to her, image, imaginally constructed yantras, intricate geometries of light alive in the minds of practitioners, who offer the creative power of consciousness itself, finely constructed spaces where the beautiful one of the three worlds sits in a pavilion of rubies in a lake of pure crystalline vibration. In the midst of the ocean of nectar, on an island of gems, as the Sundari Lahari says, that's her, too, the rainbow light of spontaneous presence, that dances about in the spacious crystal of consciousness, the shimmer, the gleam, finer and finer still, the light of pure consciousness itself, the dazzling play of the finer vibrations. She is free and is of the character of playing in the field of pure consciousness, says the Kandaha, she sports in the creative delight of her own consciousness, says the Paritrushika Vivarana, and the Kamarika Kandaha calls her the one who delights in spontaneous play. She lives in all beings, says the Chandipataha, in the form of awareness, in the form of reflection, in the form of intellect, in the form of memory. And so her body is the luminous shimmering of all the visions of her, of all the visions of her, all the memories of her, all the dreams of her. What was our dream of her? In what luminosities, what bends and sways, what fierce waves did we feel her, present, alive, awake? Who was she to us during these fleeting days? When this life comes to an end, will we wish that we sought her out more? Will we wish we'd turned our attention just a little bit more to the light on the water? Who was she to us? Was she a distant thought, a faraway dream, a neglected shrine growing with cobwebs? Or was she a shining axis that passed right through us, that washed our spines in rapture, and gave us anchor when this life seemed nothing but tears and failure? Was she distant and cold as a cynical dismissal, or theoretical as a heady philosophical treatise, or vague as a, oh yeah, I mean, I guess there's some kind of energy or life force in the universe or whatever? Or was she as intricate and fully formed as a yantra of interlocking luminous triangles, expressing an order as precise and perfect as the double helix of DNA? How often did we choose distraction over her? How often, beloveds, and trust me, I'm asking myself this same question, how often did we choose the screen over her? How did we feel her? In the fine movement of the breeze through the tamarind tree, the vital breath pulsing through our limbs as we danced the ritual steps? Was it through the pain of pilgrimage, the cry of longing, the blues song, the wail, the great lament? Was it through the paintbrush stroke, the quick glance of the falcon, the brilliant rays on the autumn lake? The Chandipata says she lives in all beings in the form of brilliance, in all beings in the form of brilliance. Do you remember her on that hike that one day? Perhaps after much effort and huffing and puffing, we reached the top of that one hill, our hearts throbbing in our chests, and we raised our gaze to the horizon, the mountains that day shining as the sun kindled them with the evening's fire, and we felt part of something, or we felt the hum, the friction of both being a separate being and being inextricably linked to everything, to the entire universe, all at once. That was her. She is the eyes looking back on herself, shining with rapture, the texts say, flushed by the joy of her own self-beholding. Do you remember the light that day? Flushed in the joy of its own self-beholding. That was her. The clear light, the clear, clear light, it was her, the clear light, it was her.\n Mother, cries the Sundari Lahari, the dust of your feet is an island of shelter where the luminous sunrise dawns. Were you there for that luminous sunrise, that flush of all things becoming, those incandescent rays? It was her, beloved, it was her, the power, the mother, the power, it was you, oh power. It was you, divine mother of the universe. Real special thanks today to Nivedita Gunturi for providing this beautiful, beautiful singing throughout this episode, the wonderful devotional songs and bhajans that she sang for us. And I'd love to be able to point you to more of her music, but I can't because it's not available anywhere else. And as always, this episode contains reference to many books, movies, etc., etc. These include The Force That Threw the Green Fuse Drives the Flower, a poem by Dylan Thomas. The Song Samaya by Trevor Hall. The Yogini Hrdaya, there's a good version by Andre Padoux called The Heart of the Yogini. The Devatma Shakti, The Chandipataha, Offering Flowers, Feeding Skulls by June McDaniel. The Skanda Purana, The Devi Mahatmya, The Sundari Lahari, I know I'm giving our friend Sai who puts all the titles together for our Goodreads group, I'm raising his blood pressure right now. The Ashtottara Shatanamavali of Goddess Lakshmi, The Sahasranamavali of Goddess Lakshmi, The Lalita Sahasranama, The Paritrishika Vivarana, The Self-Possessed by Frederick Smith, The Vicissitudes of the Goddess by Sri Padma, The Tantric Body by Gavin Flood, Kshema Raja's commentary on the Netra Tantra, and you can find that in the book The Yoga of the Netra Tantra by Bettina Balmer. The Tripura Rahasya, The Nitya Sodashi Karnava, there's a good version in Jeffrey Liedtke's book The Goddess Within and Beyond the Three Cities, The Gnaneshwari, Mother of the Universe Versions of Ram Prasad Sen by Lex Hixson, The Kumari Kakandaha, The Section of the Mantana by Rava Tantra Concerning the Virgin Goddess Translated with Commentary by Mark Dizkowski, and the Malini Stava can be found deeply buried in there. Thanks to Christopher Wallace for his translation of the Tantric texts and to the work of Stanislawar Timalsina who is a Tantric lineage holder and you can find his work through the Vimarsha Foundation, that's VimarshaFoundation.org, Vimarsha is V-I-M-A-R-S-H-A Foundation.org, and of course the song Bless the Broken Road that Led Me Right to You by Rascal Flatts.\n
